# Abstract


This master's thesis delves into the transformative influence of online collaborative research tools on the creative practices of artists, designers, and developers. With the evolution of the World Wide Web in mind, understanding how knowledge and collection-making through these innovative tools and practices shape or resonate with the creative landscape is paramount.

To start I will define a gamut of online collaborative research tools used by creatives. These tools of many shapes encompass a diverse range of platforms, including social media, image classifiers, cloud-based document sharing, project management, and collaborative coding repositories. This delineation sets the stage for understanding how these tools empower creative individuals and teams. 
  
Simultaneously, we will elucidate the concept of digital gardening, an emerging practice (yet present since the early World Wide Web) that involves the cultivation and curation of public personal knowledge repositories slowly over time. This approach, in opposition to social media chronological streams of content, envisions a model of the web as topology, which helps foster the growth over time of creative ideas and facilitates interdisciplinary collaboration through learning in public, in experimental and playful ways.

By synthesizing these concepts, we will explore how artists, designers, and developers harness online collaborative research tools and digital gardening techniques in their work. Through a set of qualitative interviews and case studies of user-generated content platforms such as Are.na and also actual digital gardens, we will gain insights into the transformative potential of these tools and processes, potentially shifting current uses of user-aggregated content platforms towards user-aggregated curated collaborative content websites and platforms.

### Keywords

Knowledge, Collection, Gathering, Digital Gardening, User-Generated Content, Web, Curation, Collaboration, Learning in Public
