<br class="breakpage">

# Introduction

The song *Remember to Remember*, composed by Rick Holmes and produced by Roy Ayers, serves as a reminder to transmit the profound wisdom and invaluable lessons of past humanitarian leaders to the coming generations. While the song was released in 1981, and references public figures such as Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X, among others, its chorus invitation resonates in me today: 

> Pass the information, Extend the Knowledge[^holmes]

[^holmes]: Chorus in the lyrics of Remember to Remember – Rick Holmes, 1981

(video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=smEbUcgI24o poster: content/images/01.jpg caption: Rick Holmes – Remember to Remember, 1981, produced by Roy Ayers.)

The chorus spreads an idea of working toward collective good, touching on the need for unity and understanding. It then helps reinforce the importance of sharing the knowledge we can learn, collect, and gather over time. This, to me, gives a sense of what the World Wide Web's will introduce ten years later – its underlying motivations being to pool resources and help the storing, updating, and finding of information – and how it evolved until today with advances in hardware miniaturization, Internet wireless connectivity, data storage, and arrival of user-generated-content platforms created by GAFA corporations (Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon, etc.) owning a vast portion of the web. Those social networks and services allow users to connect together and express opinions, images, texts and videos to friends, families, and create online communities. The spread of the Internet caused a sudden leap in access to and ability to share information and knowledge, where the amount of digital data stored grew exponentially, while at the same time being detained in silo platforms owning our private data or hiding content behind subscriptions and paywalls.

The term _knowledge_ refers in the English dictionary to the "fact or condition of knowing something with familiarity gained through experience, learning or association – by study, investigation, observation or experience". Its French translation, under the plural form, "connaissances", appears in 1595 and is described by French writer Montaigne as the "content of knowledge, all that we know."[^montaigne] The singular counterpart "connaissance" however, introduces another layer to how we can also acquire knowledge: practice. "Action or fact to learn something by study and/or practice; result of this action or fact: skills in something, experience of something, knowledge, know-how." This definition makes most sense in a creative practice where practicing implies knowledge behaving in multiple modes, such as intellect, and intuition. Philosophically speaking, French philosopher Renan states: "Knowledge is infinity, versed in a finite mould."[^renan]. In addition, the APA Dictionary states knowledge as a range of one’s understanding or information. In some contexts the words *knowledge* and *memory* are used synonymously.[^apa]

[^montaigne]: MONTAIGNE, *Essais, 1595,* 1. II, chap. XII, éd. Gallimard, p. 599

[^renan]: RENAN, *L'Avenir de la sc.,* 1890, p. 477

[^apa]: [https://dictionary.apa.org/knowledge](https://dictionary.apa.org/knowledge)

Those two last declarations help us to introduce how the extent of one's knowledge might be compiled and *remembered*. For someone to make sense of all that they know, accessible knowledge is acquired by processes of selection, collection, and then organization, in order to be known. By extending one's knowledge, we somehow delimit what we know from what we do not, or have not yet learned, experienced, or practiced. In common sense, making a collection would mean bringing together elements due to their value, attractiveness, or interestingness. According to the English dictionary, a _collection_ is a "group of similar things that you have deliberately acquired, usually over a period of time." While I agree with evolution over time, and that to collect implies a voluntary decision, I prefer another definition stating collection as "an accumulation of objects gathered for study, comparison, or exhibition or as a hobby." This one embodies a broader sense of collecting as the gathered pieces of information or items can be sometimes quite disparate while sharing a few common points, or *associations*. Coming back to how we defined knowledge in the first place, this is now getting interesting to see that if knowledge can be gained by association, then the act of collection clearly aims towards this end.

As Hans Ulrich Obrist states in his publication *Ways of Curating:*[^obrist]

> To make a collection is to find, acquire, organize, and store items, whether in a room, a house, a library, a museum, or a warehouse. It is also, inevitably, a way of thinking about the world – the connections and principles that produce a collection contain assumptions, juxtapositions, findings, experimental possibilities, and associations. Collection-making, you could say, is a method of producing knowledge.

[^obrist]: Hans Ulrich Obrist - Ways of Curating

While Obrist focuses on physical objects relative to a practice of curation, the emphasis on the way of thinking, the connections, and associations, are key also to how creative practices collect, connect by association, and grow knowledge over time to develop new skills, crafts, or ideas. Creatives indeed practice collection-making online by using knowledge networks to curate folders and connections of disparate informations (pins, likes, posts or blocks into favorites, channels, or boards, depending on the platforms), serving personal inspiration, client commissions, or contributing collectively in the sharing of resources. Integrating User-generated-content platforms to do creative research, collaborate, or curate one’s influences raises many topics about the privacy of ideas while references are actually pooled from other users’ publicly shared data, and also to what extent a collaborative platform is indeed used for collaborative purposes.

This slower pace of acquiring knowledge, if set publicly, can be echoed by an emerging practice online of _digital gardening_ one’s personal knowledge through _vaults_ (private) or _garden_ (public). A digital garden, is first a neologism that originated in the nineties with the website _Hypertext Garden_, by Mark Bernstein (1998), it then re-emerged in 2015 with a conference at Stanford by Mike Caulfield, _The Garden and the Stream, a Technopastoral_. This talk then turned into an essay, underlined the need for reclaiming independent ownership from corporate Web platforms and social media, by setting up a personal space of curation on the Web, where content is de-streamed from chronological feeds of blogs and social media in order to be cultivated over time. Often referred as _second brains_, i.e. repositories to externalise knowledge, learnings, or memories, the term _garden_ inspires me most in the sense of its public view and access, and to how the vocabulary of nature is used to describe technological actions and methods. Commonly defined as a “plot of ground where herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables are cultivated”, other definitions of the word strike me: “a rich-well cultivated region”, and another one implying “[…] so that the public can go and see them [plants and flowers].” A digital garden can therefore stand as a public digital space storing elements (knowledge) growing other time. 

Through such practices, between storing, learning, and sharing work in-progress resources, we will see how digital gardeners can grow a better internet, collection-making by compiling notes, ideas, and visual research while learning in public, embracing the imperfection of an ever-evolving knowledge being gathered and ultimately sharing their resources for others, extending the knowledge.

Therefore, this master thesis aims to answer the following question: 

How using online knowledge networks and collaborative user aggregated platforms can help influence or cultivate alternative creative practices? 

How user-genereted content crossed paths with creative research and what are the benefits and tension points from using those platforms? How artists, designers and developers use such platforms? What are the collaborative possibilities and does it fit their practices? Why is the vocabulary of nature intertwined with technology? Could digital gardening and independent social networks shift the current state of GAFAs centralized Web to a more conscious experience of browsing the Web?

In order to gain insights, a set of qualitative interviews was conducted over the summer 2023, speaking to international artists, designers, and developers. Through those exchanges, we will draw out specific use cases from the interviewees on different web platforms of the creative trade with a special emphasis on the Are.na platform (2012), which was the most recurrent platform used across all interviews. We will also discover within the discussions inherent tension points emerge from what it means to store, curate, learn, collaborate, and share resources on such user-aggregated content platforms, and sometimes without even knowing it, creatives could be taking part in digital gardening processes.

We will start in the first part of this thesis by situating how the dissemination of knowledge significantly changed from analog to digital storage and indexation with the apparition of the World Wide Web. From before its birth context (1989) and evolution towards a social Web at the turn of the new millenia, how it is now, how it could be, and even sometimes, how it should be. To this end, we will not only introduce software advances through a timeline of user-content generated platforms but also contextualize the hardware improvements leading to smaller devices and wireless access to the internet and how the resulting use of the Web changed our capacity to access and collect knowledge.