<br class="breakpage">

# Gathering as a radical creative process 

#### This chapter embarks on a nuanced exploration of gathering as a radical creative process in the digital realm. From Le Guin’s perspective to evolving contemporary digital gathering methods, it dissects how platforms redefine authorship and emphasize collective efforts within a container-content paradigm. With diverse perspectives from nine Western-based creatives interviewed, this chapter illuminates the shift from traditional to online methods. It scrutinizes the role of specific UGC platforms in the creative process, used for curation and collaboration on creative content gatherings. Therefore, it unravels their impact on creativity, knowledge cultivation, and the complexities in managing information across varied digital spaces, as well as the intricate relationships between visual culture, content curation, and platform usability.

<br class="breakpage">

## On Gathering

Designer Mindy Seu roots Ursula K. Le Guin’s gathering practice and extends it to a contemporary approach in the digital age. Le Guin in her book _Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction_ (1986) brings perspectives on the notion of collection and gathering, stating the first human tool was a basket, a tool for communion, rather than a spear, a tool for domination. It then places the protagonist in narrative structures as a gatherer rather than a hunter.[^LeGuin] To this aim, Le Guin emphasizes the significance of gathering, collecting, and sharing. This vision supports the idea of a collection working towards collective good expressed by Daniel and asks questions about the role of the collector, and also the form of the container gathering such collections. The carrier bag, in this context, becomes a symbol of collection and preservation—a vessel for holding various elements that contribute to the sustenance and enrichment of a community. Le Guin's theory challenges the dominance of the hero's narrative and highlights the importance of collective efforts, cooperation, and the sharing of resources and knowledge.

[^LeGuin]: LE GUIN, Ursula K., YI, Pul and HARAWAY, Donna, 2019. <br>*The carrier bag theory of fiction*. London: Ignota. <br>ISBN 978-1-9996759-9-8. 

   In her essay _On Gathering_[^Seu], Mindy Seu defines the process of gathering to “aggregate, together with collaborators, disparate pieces from an ecosystem, and develop the appropriate container for each collection.” 

Moreover, she explores how digital platforms and online events have transformed the way people gather and share information. Bringing different examples of collective collections, such as the _New Woman's Survival Catalog_,(imagenote: content/images/NewWomansSurvival.webp caption: Cover of *New Woman's Survival Catalog*, 1973, by Kirsten Grimstad & Susan Rennie. class: small) promoted as a "feminist *Whole Earth Catalog*(imagenote: content/images/whole-earth-catalog.jpg caption: Cover of the first issue of *Whole Earth Catalog*, Stewart Brand, 1968. class: small)", and the _Cyberfeminism Index_(imagenote: content/images/cyberfeminism-index.webp caption: Cover of *Cyberfeminism Index*, by Mindy Seu, 2022. class: small), Seu explores the evolving nature of gathering, blurring the lines between container and content, and challenging the traditional notions of fixed, solitary authorship, as she states:

<br class="breakpage">

> Gathering stories is radical because it refuses to give the gatherer all of the credit. The collector-collection dynamic is deliberately broken. The person who puts it together is only one of many parts. 
> <span>–Mindy Seu</span>

Gathering therefore challenges the conventional notion of individual credit or authorship. It underscores the idea that the person collecting or assembling isn't the sole creator or authority behind it. Instead, it emphasizes the collective nature of gathering, where contributors, narrators, and various sources play essential roles in shaping the narrative. It is relevant to creative processes because it questions the traditional concept of a single author being solely responsible for creation. It highlights the importance of acknowledging the multiple voices, perspectives, and contributors involved in creative endeavors, advocating for a more inclusive and collaborative approach to creation. This perspective resonates with the ethos of collective participation and shared credit, emphasizing the richness that emerges from diverse contributions and collaborative efforts that can be leveraged on UGC Platforms for creatives.

[^Seu]: SEU, Mindy, 2021. *On Gathering*. Shift Space [online]. <br>No.1. [https://issue1.shiftspace.pub/on-gathering-mindy-seu](https://issue1.shiftspace.pub/on-gathering-mindy-seu) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

The following [timeline](https://amauryhamon.github.io/Timeline-Web-Platforms/)(imagenote: content/images/qrtimeline.png class:timeline-QR caption: Timeline Link)[^timeline] aims to historicize the evolution of digital platforms and archives, from Ted Nelson's Hypertext (1963)(imagenote: content/images/Nelson-Intertwingled.png caption: Drawing of Ted Nelson in *Computer Lib/Dream Machines*, 1974) to the proliferation of current digital platforms forming the Centralized Enclosed corner of the Corporated Web. In this timeline are emphasized: major technology and platform evolutions, platforms related to creative processes mentioned in the interviews. The overall reflects a rise of smaller independent platforms after the boom of major social networks.

[^timeline]: HAMON, Amaury, *Timeline of technologies and services for online creative research (1963-2023)*, [online] <br>[https://amauryhamon.github.io/Timeline-Web-Platforms/](https://amauryhamon.github.io/Timeline-Web-Platforms/) <br>[consulted: 2023.11.27]

<iframe class="timeline" src="https://amauryhamon.github.io/Timeline-Web-Platforms/"></iframe>

(figure: content/images/timeline.png class: timeline-img caption: Screenshot of the *Timeline of technologies and services for online creative research (1963-2023).*)
(figure: content/images/timelineend.png class: timeline-img caption: Screenshot of the *Timeline of technologies and services for online creative research (1963-2023).*)

<br class="breakpage">

## Digital gathering methods as&nbsp;means to collect knowledge

Interviews conducted with nine European-based creatives (artists, designers, developers) in the summer of 2023 highlight the diversity of digital gathering methods and motivations. Assessing the transformation of creatives’ gathering methods into the digital landscape, they explored the shift from traditional to online gathering methods, emphasizing the role of UGC platforms or digital gardens in personal or collective knowledge curation, privately or publicly. Contrarily to the vertically defined classification of 20th century Paul Otlet’s Mundaneum (imagenote: content/images/mundaneum.jpg caption: *Mundaneum*, founded by Paul Otlet, 1919–34, Belgium) analog knowledge archives, Some UGC Platforms allow interconnection of content, for users to freely constitute their curation into a self-labeled knowledge base, by either uploading or connecting any content found online either inside the platform or outside. 

While **browser** tools, **social media**, **journaling**, and **search engines** are indeed recurrent within creative processes, a key typology of platforms for collection and curation refers to **visual discovery engines**, such as Pinterest with its masonry grid feed of images, Tumblr with its vertically-stacked stream of blog content, and <span class="arena">Are.na</span>, at crossroads between creative social network, knowledge management, and visual discovery platform. Those platforms for collection considerably help the gathering of visual culture, fostering creative endeavors, at varying degrees of curation quality and collaborative features (**web-clipping,** social features), depending on the community’s content and use cases. This subset of UGC aggregated platforms could be neologized as **User-Gathered Curated Collaborative Creative Content** platforms (**UGCCCC**).

(figure: content/images/pinterestgrid.png caption: Pinterest Masonry grid overview)
(figure: content/images/tumblr1.png caption: Tumblr backend stack interface overview)

In common sense, making a _collection_ would mean bringing together elements due to their value, attractiveness, or interestingness, “over a period of time”, “for study, comparison, or exhibition or as a hobby.”[^collectiondef] A collection could bring quite disparate elements while sharing a few common points, or _associations_. Emphasizing the way of thinking, the connections, and associations, are key to considering how creative practices collect, and connect by association, to grow and organize knowledge over time, and to develop documentation, new skills, crafts, or ideas. As Swiss curator, critic, and historian of art Hans Ulrich Obrist[^obrist] implies:

> To make a collection is to find, acquire, organize, and store items […]. It is also, inevitably, a way of thinking about the world–the connections and principles that produce a collection contain assumptions, juxtapositions, findings, experimental possibilities, and associations. Collection-making, you could say, is a method of producing knowledge.
> <span>–Hans Ulrich Obrist</span>

[^collectiondef]: MERRIAM WEBSTER, *Collection definition*, Merriam Webster Dictionary, 2023, [online] https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/collection [consulted: 2023.11.25]

[^obrist]: OBRIST, Hans Ulrich, 2014. *Ways of curating*. First American edition. New York: Faber and Faber, Inc. <br>ISBN 978-0-86547-819-0.

Similarly to Obrist’s definition of collection, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi defines _creativity_ as expressing unusual thoughts and helping experience the world in novel ways, implying originality, and playfulness.[^Mihaly] _Creative processus_ then, can be referred to as a form of inquiry and collection that goes beyond traditional, empirical methods and incorporates creative tactics and artistic exploration. Associated with fields such as the arts, design, and humanities, the goal is therefore not only to discover new information but also to generate novel ideas, perspectives, or expressions, to share information, through art-based production or building knowledge. 

[^Mihaly]: CSIKSZENTMIHALYI, Mihaly, 2013. *Creativity: the psychology of discovery and invention*. First Harper Perennial modern classics edition. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics. ISBN 978-0-06-228325-2. 

<br class="breakpage">

## Perspectives from Creative Practitioners

### Toolbox and processes 

This online gathering and collection-making process of creatives, as a means to fuel visual culture and generate knowledge, is firstly echoed in several steps by one of my interviewees, Florian Hilt, 3D artist and photographer based in Lausanne. By first pooling visual cues from a plurality of **algorithmic feeds** (Instagram, Twitter and TikTok), he then merges his findings into curated <span class="arena">Are.na</span> containers: 

> I'm based on a notion of micro-universes and the theory of attraction and repulsion. What interests me a lot when I have access to all this content is to be able to mix it together. It helps me to create projects as I'm building by association and repulsion of ideas.
> <span>–Florian Hilt</span>

(figure: content/images/arena-hilt.png caption: Florian Hilt's public Are.na *Moodboard* Channel)

<br class="breakpage">

UGCCCC platforms could therefore help creatives to create compatible containers for gathering and building their personal knowledge, free of imposed classification systems and norms. Yet, they raise challenges in the endeavors to manage and organize information across multiple platforms, sometimes leading to chaotic methods as artist Lucas Erin states:

> I use several of them on a _seasonal_ basis, but then I have a real problem mastering this data. My problem is that I have physical sketchbooks, I use Notes quite a lot on my iPhone and then on the other side I have a Pinterest folder and then a folder on Instagram, and then behind that there's Arena. It's all a bit mixed up. Not to mention the InDesign documents in which I try to make pdfs mood boards… My use of platforms is completely chaotic.
> <span>–Lucas Erin</span>

According to Jonas Pelzer, Berlin-based designer and developer, some platforms feel more suitable than others, while Daniel Robert Prieto, London-based Creative Director and curator of the graphic design-oriented Tumblr _[This is Grey](https://thisisgrey.tumblr.com/)_, underlines the interface ease of use:

> I tried multiple research tools in the past, but most of them don’t exist anymore. But I always came back to a non-collaborative standard setup with bookmarks and notes before using Are.na, which is the first platform I’m really happy with. […] In addition to my notes app and my analog notebook, I mainly use Are.na for research and organization. I also use Twitter, Mastodon and Instagram, but I don’t consider them comparable. I sometimes look for specific resources on Twitter and Mastodon but that’s as far as the research part goes. 
> <span>–Jonas Pelzer</span>

> Tumblr. Why do I like it? Because it's just one big stream of images, it's so simple. There are tools for downloading the whole of Tumblr.
> <span>–Daniel Robert Prieto</span>

(figure: content/images/tumblr.png caption: Thisisgrey, Daniel Robert Prieto's tumblr.)

Some interviewees also quote recurrent platforms and sources of inspiration, using models of subscription, to maintain a controlled curated news feed center when subscribed pages update new content. Via **RSS** (Really Simple Syndication) technology for American artist Baker Wardlaw, or specific **blogs** via Tumblr for industrial designer Aurélie Vial:[^inspirimgrafik]

> There's a Tumblr I think I've been going to for ten years because it's a source that's reliable for me. It's still nurtured and active. And the quality of the image compilation is pretty constant. I mean, it's never disappointed me. 
> <span>–Aurélie Vial</span>

[^inspirimgrafik]: B. Anita, 2023,  _VAJZA N'KUTI_ (Tumblr), [online] <br>[https://inspirimgrafik.tumblr.com](https://inspirimgrafik.tumblr.com/) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

(figure: content/images/anitatumblr.png caption: VAJZA N'KUTI, Anita B.'s tumblr visited by Aurélie Vial.)

Using tools does not have to be by default and one may not suffice. Most of the interviewees generally research through a combination of platforms to develop a singular process. The choice of a specific platform can come out of curiosity about the latest tool, or some interviewees have a rather opinionated approach to selecting them, as explains Gemma Copeland, Lisbon-based Australian designer and member of [Common Knowledge](https://commonknowledge.coop/), a not-for-profit worker cooperative:

> For Common Knowledge we use so many tools. Over the last couple of years, we spread out from wanting this big monolithic tool that does everything. This kind of generalist approach of trying to be this all-in-one thing is not the best because it doesn't do anything well. Tools that do one thing well, but are interoperable with other tools, I think that's the gold standard. We like tools that are quite opinionated, particularly those that are not about trying to get your attention all the time. So, for example, we don't use Slack.
> <span>–Gemma Copeland</span>

All-in-one **organizational** tools such as Notion (2018) or Linear (2019) were mentioned by Frederik Mahler-Andersen, Gemma Copeland, and Daniel Robert Prieto, whether it is for project management, note-taking code snippets, agenda, or maintaining personal CRM.[^PrietoNotion]

[^PrietoNotion]: PRIETO ROBERT, Daniel, 2023, *Favourites Directory*, Thisisgrey (Notion), [online] [https://thisisgrey.notion.site/Favourites-directory-c10bf6c6701540c387ce1ebfb1135a4c](https://thisisgrey.notion.site/Favourites-directory-c10bf6c6701540c387ce1ebfb1135a4c) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

(figure: content/images/thisisgreynotion.png caption: Daniel Robert Prieto's Public Notion compiling a directory of creatives as contact list.)

**Online browsers** already allow native functionalities such as **bookmarking** and **saving images** on local folders on one’s device, which in my own experience was the very first method I used while starting my studies in Art and Design. In addition, **search engines** such as Google Images search–heavily used by Aurélie to source images found on UGC platforms–are also one of the most basic approaches to practice visual discoveries, before accessing more specific **photo-sharing platforms** such as Flickr (2004) or **visual search engines platforms** such as Pinterest, more convenient for creatives to develop visual culture. As Brussels-based designer Émilie Pillet states:

> I record a lot of references. It's a lot easier to create this sort of local library on my computer and remember where things are than an online platform where I'll quickly forget what I've seen.
> <span>–Émilie Pillet</span>

In addition to a preference for more tangible containers of inspiration, Émilie emphasizes the printed objects inspiring her “more than platforms”, as better curated flows of references, redistributing the value of her used platforms for storage, if not made on her computer. Daniel Robert Prieto reflects on his pre-WWW early print-only gatherings:

> When I was 18, 20, the only way was design books. I spent an insane amount of money just buying design books […] spending days and days in the design library, going through books, buying, sharing, with other friends, exchanging books, that was the place to eat design, absorbing design. […] The book in itself is curated, in an order, it is selected, and it's around a topic. You take that for granted, you think that reality is like this. When you go to the internet, that curation doesn't exist. It's a bucket.
> <span>–Daniel Robert Prieto</span> 

<br class="breakpage">

### Challenges of passive gathering and&nbsp;context collapse 

**Social media** such as Instagram (2010), X (Twitter, 2006), TikTok (2016), and **Fediverse** Mastodon (2016) propose endless algorithmically filtered streams of time-bound content. In those, the use of features such as recommender systems, likes, favorites, hashtags, comments, and followers can be used to store references and connect with their creators. As Florian Hilt states, his gathering method passes through the passive visual trigger of the like button, helping him to maintain a history of his latest liked posts: “On Instagram, you can access your likes, up to three hundred, which I find quite good for my methodology because it allows me to renew myself and not go back too far in time.” Similar visual trigger methods–between obsessive consumption and productive **death-scrolling**–were discussed by Daniel R. Prieto regarding his navigation of the Tumblr feed:

> The reason I was using Tumblr was the shortcuts. I could go with "J" and "K". I think "K" was to save it, and I could go very quickly. I couldn’t go with the mouse.
> <span>–Daniel Robert Prieto</span>

Similar time-bound feeds of content can be seen in **chat applications**, in which Discord (2015) and Meta’s WhatsApp (2009) for example, can be used to share references and interact with people about them. Lucas Erin for example, regularly sends to fellow practitioners references through chat to later on create moments of discussion in real life. To further add possibilities of chat exchanges of references, WhatsApp iOS[^WhatsAppOCR] rolled out this year features such as text detection in images, allowing for instant lookup and translation. 

[^WhatsAppOCR]: LABUSCHAGNE, Hanno, 2023.03.16, *WhatsApp adds text detection feature for images*, MYBROADBAND [online] <br>[https://mybroadband.co.za/news/software/484119-whatsapp-adds-text-detection-feature-for-images.html](https://mybroadband.co.za/news/software/484119-whatsapp-adds-text-detection-feature-for-images.html) [accessed: 2023.11.25]

Algorithmic feeds are designed to stimulate the constant use of an application and maintain the attention of the user through ever renewing what is shown to the user. With advances in algorithms, feeds using recommender systems moved out of initial chronological manually curated feeds, which could lead to feeling trapped in **aesthetic bubbles**, and losing personal need for control in curation expressed by Émilie:

> I would never use Pinterest, for example, to look for references. I have the impression that with all the platforms, it sends back the same references and the same aesthetics. 
> <span>–Émilie Pillet</span>

The mentioned platforms are not without detriments to creativity. Specific issues of **context collapse** are widely expressed from the overwhelming consumption of content tending to lack source and context.

According to Daniel, “Images on the internet don't have any context. They don't have a story. They don't have a client. They have nothing. They're almost like in an empty museum.” Aurélie states that on <span class="arena">Are.na</span>: “everything is set up so that you caption your images and source them. That's why I don't use Pinterest when it's really about looking at these images and feeding yourself with something because it scrambles my brain.” Questioning the recommendation aspect, Lucas remains centered on contextualizing content outside of platforms and making it his own internally: 

> I feel that part of my job is to go and find it. So I wonder how it's offered to me, and if it's offered to me, is it offered to everyone else? […] I like the idea of being a bookworm to find information. And the question isn't necessarily whether it's true or not, it's rather what I do with it and how I transform or use it.
> <span>–Lucas Erin</span>

Gemma suggested her **blogging** as a radical alternative, not only to better contextualization but also to better appropriation of her references, and escape from the platform feeds by having a fully-owned space. Using whatever platform exists, even if multiple, is indeed radically different than having your own. Gemma’s blog[^gemmablog] is not aiming to “necessarily produce original ideas because nothing is original, everything's a remix. But at least, to kind of draw out those threads and spend a bit more time on them and go further with the curation.” As she states:

> Part of wanting to build a blog was that my practice was too much just collecting and consuming, and it felt in a way passive, and not ever working through in greater detail what I thought about things, almost going too far onto this kind of like intuitive collecting and not enough synthesis and articulating my own point of view.
> <span>–Gemma Copeland</span>

[^gemmablog]: COPELAND, Gemma, 2023, *Writing*, GEMMA COPELAND [online] [https://gemmacope.land/writing/](https://gemmacope.land/writing/) [accessed: 2023.11.25]

This informs that gathering could remain seen as passive on existing platforms compared to more active processes of **journaling** or **note-taking**, recurrent across most of the interviews. Apps such as Apple Notes used by Lucas Erin and Baker Wardlaw, can sometimes bring further context. In a context also marked by the emergence of contemporary productivity software, Gemma Copeland and Baker Wardlaw invested in **personal knowledge base** (PKB) management systems such as Obsidian (2020) or Roam Research (2019), to build interconnected notes as a **digital garden** and experiment with a **wiki** information architecture to enhance associative thinking:

> In my personal practice or, as I'm working on common knowledge projects, it's mainly, Are.na for references and then Obsidian for note-taking, which is also like a digital garden.
> <span>–Gemma Copeland</span>

In exploring gathering processes on online knowledge networks and user-aggregated platforms, it becomes evident that platforms such as Pinterest, Tumblr, and <span class="arena">Are.na</span>, play a transformative role in creative practices. They enable the pooling of visual cues, the creation of compatible containers for knowledge, and the construction of personal knowledge bases for visual culture to be digested, and appropriated, helping to build new ideas and learnings. In turn, creatives developed combinatory methods across various online platforms, ranging from passive to active. 

From passive consumption of context-collapsed content to more active processes of contextualization and gathering through collection-making, curation, notes, blogs, and ultimately networked knowledge of digital gardens, those processes of online gathering and of making sense of their developing visual culture reshape the narrative of individual ownership to the collection, including references as a sum of influences, which creatives could be more public about.

Another question is crucial regarding the collaborative online practice of sharing or not. It is symptomatic of different ways of considering the act of gathering or collection: as a personal process that should be kept behind the scenes, as a personal creative process, or is it considered as part of a community sharing knowledge stance?

