<br class="breakpage">

# Sharing or Gatekeeping? 

## Gauging collaboration in&nbsp;gathering methods

#### This chapter delves into the collaborative aspects of gathering, exploring the transition from individualistic creative processes to more inclusive models of collaborative commons within user-generated content platforms. Despite the platforms’ tendency towards privacy, they paradoxically promote the interconnection of external sources. The chapter emphasizes the broader themes of sharing, open-access culture, and reconsideration of ownership. It draws insights from interviews to scrutinize platform challenges, including cultural shifts, the balance between individual ownership, and the push for public access in resource sharing. Additionally, it examines the initiative to build handmade digital gardens outside platforms, which critically assess ownership and sharing in a public environment. Economic implications, such as the impact of shared creative processes on competition, professional development, and job opportunities, are explored, highlighting the potential for collective knowledge growth.

<br class="breakpage">

## Collaborative Challenges in&nbsp;UGCCCC Platforms

UGCCCC platforms can raise a question about the collective benefits of having so many resources gathered in one place. How can we leverage the power of community and shift towards a mindful sharing and interconnection of resources online? With contributing features to other gatherings, curating containers in teams, or simply showcasing public resources, gathering may take a more critical step in building and sharing knowledge. While the gathering of some interviewees can remain private or _single-player_, they would not be able to really gather if the whole community was about gatekeeping, turning the walled garden into private individual vaults.

According to Daniel Robert Prieto, the broader posting on the Web through extraverted UGC platforms leads to the following issues, compared to early personal collection websites:[^cpacks]

> The problem is not technical, it's cultural. There was a culture before of people posting for the sake of posting because they wanted to do something good with the world. I remember there's one guy that I downloaded the whole site, that was collecting, cigarette packs. He had a collection of like fucking thousands on the shittiest website you could imagine. And the guy just posted it there. That spirit is what's missing these days. We have that insane technology. Nobody's posting dog shit on anything. And when they do, everything is too self-conscious, too self-promotional. Very few people are just doing things for the sake of like, “Oh, it's beautiful things”. That's the problem. Everybody is already hustling. And that sucks. Fuck hustling. 

(figure: content/images/cpacks.png caption: Innokenty Chernishev’s private collection of cigarette packs class: full)

[^cpacks]: CHERNISHEV, Innokenty, *Private Collection of Cigarette Packs*, C-PACKS [online] [https://www.c-packs.com/](https://www.c-packs.com/) <br>[consulted: 2023.11.25]

Émilie acknowledges that while keeping everything private: “As I'm following people I'm interested in, I figure that if they were private too, it would make the whole thing a lot less interesting. I have to admit I'm not comfortable with the idea of making public my own research or things I've spent a long time finding out.” According to Danish designer and developer Frederik Mahler-Andersen: “There are a lot of people who share a lot of things, with a lot of goodwill, which is great. But there are also a lot of people who have so many private things, I imagine.” For Jonas, despite acknowledging the benefits of “such a big pool of knowledge you can easily access […] the collaborative part is not essential” as he wants “sole control over the curation.”

<br class="breakpage">

## Dismantling individual ownership in collections

This desire for sole control of curation reveals a priority of ownership and privacy rather than access and transparency toward creative research. According to Florian, the process of research only speaks to him and would lack context if shown publicly, implying that the result of research through creation is what matters most: “I don't see what this would bring to someone else in the sense that it would just speak to them visually or textually. For me, it's really ideas put together in my head that means something in my head. […] Is there any point in me giving my tips on how I make certain images when in fact the result is the image?” Lucas expresses a similar point of view to his artistic practice: “I've never felt the need to communicate a universe. For me, my universe is internal, it's intimate, and afterward, I convey it differently because it's directly in the work and I don't need to use it or describe it to someone.” 

Intimacy towards one’s research can either be felt as fearful or fascinating. According to Lucas, “When you see the library of someone you don't know or someone who isn't there, you're making a form of judgment.” Whereas for Daniel, when looking at someone’s research and profile channels, “You start getting a sense of what the aesthetics of the personality of the person like selecting or whatever, but you need to see like 300 images to be able to see that. It's like you're scavenging through their brain and their soul.”

While acknowledging the sharing of resources beneficial in mediation contexts, Lucas depicts the overall sharing of research outside of this use case as detrimental to originality in art production:

<br class="breakpage">

> There's a culture of singularity, wit, genius, talent, and so on, so to have an album in which all the references are accessible, must scare a lot of people because it kills the idea of originality. Even if reproduction is completely assumed in all contemporary discourse in the art world, and there's nothing new anymore, it certainly remains a fantasy.  
> <span>–Lucas Erin</span>

Control over curation is similarly emphasized by Florian, who would only gather publicly with an already existing team of collaborators through a trusted and familiar shared-space environment. On Aurélie’s side, it is more about not being a participative person on social networks, while she acknowledges indirectly contributing to the platform by feeding outside content into it. According to Daniel, it is more a contributing ratio equilibrium: “Collaborating with someone, I've tried it a couple of times, it never worked. Also because I'm too insane, in the sense of like, I post a lot. And then, people post just two things. It's the rhythm. I would need to find someone who posts just as much as me. And there are not that many people.”

<br class="breakpage">

## Contextualizing together

To combat with issue of context-collapse collaboratively around the overwhelming passive accumulation of references, interviewees also mentioned how **video conference** tools such as Zoom (2011), used by Daniel Robert Prieto, and **collaborative canvas** such as Miro (2011), used by Florian Hilt in commercial projects, can help **contextualize** references and discuss them:

> If you're going to collaborate with other people, it's less about the dumping of shit and more about communication. So what I've found is, just spend more time on Zoom, exchanging images.
> <span>–Daniel Robert Prieto</span>

Similarly, for Design Researcher Maggie Appleton, Digital Gardens, similarly to Wikipedia’s wiki architecture, embraces Hypertext as a “richly linked landscape that grows slowly over time.”[^Appleton] This allows us to consider Digital Gardens as contextual knowledge containers, emancipating from time-bound streams and walled gardens of UGC platforms. 

[^Appleton]: APPLETON, Maggie, 2020, *A Brief History & Ethos of the Digital Garden*, Maggie Appleton [online] <br>https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history <br>[consulted: 2023.11.25]

While digital gardening was first output by developers with coding skills, it soon drew the attention of plenty of writers, researchers, and note-taking enthusiasts. The growing communities of PKB practitioners and advances in Web development allowed more and more gardeners to join the movement. Web technologies like Vercel (2015) or Netlify (2014) and static-site-generators (publishing webpages out of plain text files) helped to keep the pain out of development and focus on seeds of content, while proprietary platforms like Roam, TiddlyWiki (2004), Notion (2018) and Obsidian (2020) progressively proposed no-code alternatives to publish digital gardens online, yet limiting its users to standardized layouts.

<br class="breakpage">

## Shifting to a Collaborative Commons Model

Gemma Copeland argues existing models of contribution, public sharing, and open-source culture could help fight a climate of competition within the creative sector:

> I think this kind of approach of the commons, open source, and collectivity means that you create this kind of shared abundance, where you can all get something and be happy and enjoy your work, etc. And you're not trying to fight each other. 

This shift from a somehow capitalist model of scarcity (i.e. limited resources) and knowledge gatekeeping towards a post-capital model of abundance can lead to emerging alternative ideas of governance, such as the collaborative commons, in which we all have to gain how resources are held in common, and how they can be collectively managed. Applied to creative processes, _Commons in Design_[^commonsdesign] emphasize “knowledge-based peer commons” such as sharing references, designs, techniques, workspaces, or infrastructures, therefore coinciding commons “with the repositioning of designers and the self-understanding of their discipline, ways of working, and education.” 

[^commonsdesign]: SCHRANZ, Christine (ed.), 2023. *Commons in design*. Amsterdam: Valiz. ISBN 978-94-93246-31-7. [online] [https://valiz.nl/images/Commons-in-Design.pdf](https://valiz.nl/images/Commons-in-Design.pdf) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

An example based on digital content and intellectual property is for example the Creative Commons licensing system (2001), adopted by many digital companies such as Flickr, YouTube, SoundCloud, and Wikipedia, which helps abandon traditional copyright laws and patents, for enhanced collaboration, innovation, and research. As Christopher J. Dew states in an article:[^Dew]

<br class="breakpage">

> Capitalism is designed to manage resources within a closed system of scarcity, and it is thoroughly ineffective at organizing the economic life of a society in which access is valued over ownership, transparency over privacy, and collaborative co-creation over competition.

[^Dew]: J. DEW, Christopher, 2015, *PostCapitalism: Rise of the Collaborative Commons*, MEDIUM, [online]  [https://medium.com/basic-income/post-capitalism-rise-of-the-collaborative-commons-62b0160a7048](https://medium.com/basic-income/post-capitalism-rise-of-the-collaborative-commons-62b0160a7048) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

Sharing knowledge and ownership on collaborative platforms should help remodel our creative processes towards more solidarity and cohesion within creative communities. For Gemma Copeland, it is indeed about embracing the network:

> It just all boils down to my inherent hatred of individualism and ownership. With Common Knowledge, all these things I'm interested in, it's about shared ownership and creating a commons and recognizing that we're not individuals, we're part of a network where we contain communities.

As stated by Schranz, “well-known examples of socially supported commons projects are the free encyclopedia Wikipedia or the open maps of OpenStreetMap. One of the reasons why these projects are so successful is that they rely on the participation of users and are self-regulating, constantly revised, and further developed collectively.”

Collaborative commons as shared actions (commoning) in a creative practice can also give a sense of balance, in which at some point, learning what is accessible to you could be then retransmitted to peers instead of keeping to oneself, as Frederik implies for his learning to code process, and desire to develop open sources projects:

<br class="breakpage">

> I feel pretty guilty because that's what I did in the beginning too, looking for stuff in the source code. And that's what taught me how to do a lot of things. And in the end, you want to give something back that's been useful to you. It's like with P2P downloading, there are seeders and leechers, and I think I'm more of a seeder than a leecher unfortunately, but I'd like to change my ratio […] to do things that wouldn't necessarily end up in a project or a mandate, but which could be open source code or plugins.

<br class="breakpage">

## Economic and Professional Implications

When research gets intertwined with models of competition, scarcity, and individual ownership, the economic value of creative research online acts as a competitive skill to preserve. According to Aurélie from a designer’s perspective, knowing how to develop one’s visual culture is part of the work and should remain confidential, as “a kind of professional secret.”

> On these sites where you archive things, I can see how my ability to search for images has evolved, and I think it's an important skill in my work. Not everyone can do good image research. And so, I have the impression that there's a part of it where you have to preserve it from the outside because it's a job. Not everyone has the same ability to do good reference research and to be well-referenced.
> <span>–Aurélie Vial</span>

According to Daniel, one of the biggest sharers of resources among the interviewees, the competition in a design practice remains prevalent despite enhanced access to inspiration: “Economically, no. Zero percent. […] Don't make friends with designers if you're trying to get clients […] But in terms of inspiration, of course, 100%.” Daniel further argues that sharing his discoveries developed through maturity gained over the years: 

> When I was younger, I was much more protective of my links, and my discoveries. But then at some point, you start realizing it doesn't really matter. You share it, it's even better. You meet people, you help other people, who cares? It's not like they're going to steal your findings because they are just there. 

There is no single end goal for creative activities on such platforms, and why interviewees practice collection on UGCCCC platforms. For Aurélie, it is mostly for individual gain, as much a personal curation need, as a **professional skill**, while for Daniel, it is a means to an end for **self-reflection** and tending an obsessive need to accumulate visual culture and stay afloat of the latest trends:

> I compile mood boards to convince clients to go in one direction or another. For me, visual inspiration is not just reference but also a means to convince my clients.
> <span>–Aurélie Vial</span>

> When you have a very long career, you look five years behind, and then you're like, oh my god, I'm so bad, or my style was so shitty, but then it's cool, you see the growth, you see the progress, and it makes you reflect. […] I don't do it with a goal. I just do it because I have a stupid impulse of collecting shit and organizing stuff into pockets. I don't have a research system. I just look for the stuff. I pick what is beautiful and what is interesting.
> <span>–Daniel Robert Prieto</span>

<br class="breakpage">

From a developer point of view, within active communities of open-learning, code-sharing forums and platforms, and open-source programming resources, Frederik gauges the ownership of ideas and skills as less important than collaboration:

> On a commercial level, the stakes for someone who's a developer/graphic designer are different. If someone were to steal that, you're so much into GitHub code-sharing that the notion of copyright is less present. I'm not at all afraid of someone stealing my references.
> <span>–Frederik Mahler-Andersen</span>

For Gemma, her positioning towards sharing and collectivizing research is to fight individualistic practices:

> I guess one of the continuous lines of thinking that I've been interested in over the years is trying to move away from this idea of designers as individual geniuses. Instead, recognizing you're kind of a sum of all these influences, etc. I try to be quite public about who those influences are for me.
> <span>–Gemma Copeland</span>

Being open to sharing your process can comparatively spark in-real-life collaborations, depicting a sense of trust through one’s extent of visual culture knowledge and references, which allowed Gemma new job opportunities:

<br class="breakpage">

>  When I emailed Mark [Kremers, from Future Corp] […] looking for a job, he recognized my name from Are.na. And that's kind of how I got the job. And then, we went to New York and actually met the people from Are.na. I've met a load of people through it, in a weird way, because I guess there's obviously not really messaging on it.
> <span>–Gemma Copeland</span>

The sharing and collaborative gathering certainly can make a better-produced research or creation, while proposing a shift for the collective growth of knowledge. Yet encompassing how creatives build their visual culture can remain considered as valuable soft skills, making the difference in a creative market driven by competition of ideas, offering opportunities on both private and public gathering methods.

<br class="breakpage">
<br class="breakpage">
