<br class="breakpage">

# Conclusion

In conclusion, the exploration of how creatives gather and share resources within the broader landscape of private aggregated UGCCCC platforms, with <span class="arena">Are.na</span> as a case study, has revealed both appealing & unique attributes and the tensions influencing in turn their creative methods. <span class="arena">Are.na</span>, while remaining walled, brings features of digital gardening, community-scaled for creatives, and distinguishes itself by offering the creative community a mindful space for curation, context, and collaboration, bringing a commitment to user privacy and without the expected passive features of mainstream social media. Its high-quality curated content and collaborative features allow enhanced development of creatives’ visual culture while offering offline professional opportunities, in which creative fields are not just a craft and know-how but a knowledge-based discipline.

Interviews with creatives shed light on a plurality of methods and approaches on used platforms, from gatekeeping to radical active ways of gathering and sharing, influencing in turn the overall practice of creatives. The beneficial enhanced access to inspiration with widespread visual culture leads simultaneously to context concerns, which depending on passive or more active methods, leads to either decontextualization, homogenization of visual culture, or deep contextualization. The balance between radical shared ownership of gathering and public sharing while preserving the intimacy of one's research emerged as a significant challenge, with diverse perspectives on the economic value of creative endeavors online in a market driven by competition. Gatekeeping, by nurturing scarcity instead of abundance models, tended through public curating, contributing, and sharing resources. This collaborative commoning approach to gathering and sharing is critical to pivoting default competition on originality into better collaboration and engagement with the creative community.

Through its steady growth, <span class="arena">Are.na</span> fostered a community of creative gatherers. The platform's design encourages a more open, thoughtful, and engaged approach to gathering in the digital age, through redefining ownership, bringing context, content curation, and fostering a unique sense of community among its members. Intersecting creativity and technology, these collaborative curation platforms continue to shape and reflect online culture, influencing in turn creative processes. The examination of specific cases like <span class="arena">Are.na</span> or digital gardens contributes to our understanding of the dynamics at play in fueling creativity within the digital realm. The case of <span class="arena">Are.na</span> used by creatives demonstrates the need for smaller-scaled communities, complexities, and intricacies inherent in UGC platforms, offering valuable insights into the evolving landscape of digital collaboration, content curation, and contextualization of the Web drowned by algorithms and centralized private platforms.

Simultaneously to the writing of this thesis, to better understand the possibilities of digital gardening, and what were the possibilities and the limits of _UGCCCC_ / <span class="arena">Are.na</span> platform, regarding a more radical creation, I experimented since the summer of 2023 with the customization of my own digital garden[^gardenself], using researcher Jacky Zhao’s _Quartz_[^quartz] Digital Garden Static Site Generator (SSG) and following his prompt: **“How might we create infrastructures and technologies that empower the residents of the Web to have access to the same tools as the architect?”**.[^zhaoprompt] With Laurel Schwulst’s 2018 essay on how websites could be[^schwulst] and J.R. Carpenter’s 2015 essay _A Handmade Web_[^carpenter] in mind, my motivation was not only to address hands on the topic of this research but develop a **learning in public** educational space as a network of interconnected ideas and thoughts, growing over time, and to resist _wysiwyg_ templates and enclosed platforms. Having such a public personal container for my gathered knowledge feels less centered on gathering visual culture, which to me <span class="arena">Are.na</span> excels in, but more on note-taking in public, to immediately share outside walled garden educational resources about design and code.

[^gardenself]: HAMON, Amaury, 2023, CODE 101, [online] [https://teaching.amauryhamon.com/](https://teaching.amauryhamon.com/) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

[^quartz]: ZHAO, Jacky, 2023, jzhao.xyz, [online] [https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/](https://quartz.jzhao.xyz/) [consulted: 2023.11.27]

[^zhaoprompt]: ZHAO, Jacky, 2023, Quartz 4.0, Quartz, [online] https://jzhao.xyz/ [consulted: 2023.11.25]

[^schwulst]: SCHWULST, Laurel, 2018, _My website is a shifting house next to a river of knowledge. What could yours be?_, THE CREATIVE INDEPENDENT, [online] [https://thecreativeindependent.com/essays/laurel-schwulst-my-website-is-a-shifting-house-next-to-a-river-of-knowledge-what-could-yours-be/](https://thecreativeindependent.com/essays/laurel-schwulst-my-website-is-a-shifting-house-next-to-a-river-of-knowledge-what-could-yours-be/) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

[^carpenter]: R. CARPENTER, J., 2015, A Handmade Web, LuckySoap, [online] [http://luckysoap.com/statements/handmadeweb.html](http://luckysoap.com/statements/handmadeweb.html) [consulted: 2023.11.25]

(figure: content/images/gardenself.png caption: My own digital garden, oriented towards sharing coding resources for pedagogical purposes, while gathering snippets of code I learn)

(figure: content/images/previewnode.png caption: Hovering a linked node inside a page, allows to preview its content. class: full )

(figure: content/images/interconnection.png caption: Opening the Menu toggles a nodal graph view overlay of the gathered resources since inception. Hovering a node, highlights its interconnected tags, folders and notes. class: full)


