Bio

This interview was done through videocall and recorded in September 7th, 2023.

**Amaury:** Can you start by introducing a bit yourself 

**Daniel:** so, I am... I'm from Spain, but now I live in London, and more or less I'm going to tell you my whole design story. So, when I was 18, I started studying special effects, 3D, all that stuff, but in the first year, I realized it's pretty boring, it's just technical.

And, not by, I mean, I was attracted to pure graphic design, so I started working in a fashion magazine, just doing pure graphic design. And from there, I started, like, With the whole journey of trying everything, and then I moved to advertising, in the beginning to digital, then I did branding, then I had my own studio, and then to cut story, long story short, then in 2008, after the crisis, I had to shut down my, my studio, and then I started like, sending portfolios like mad all over the world to see, okay, maybe there's something out there, and then, , Studio from London hired me, And that was almost about 10 years ago.

Then since then, I moved to London. And in here, I've been doing, well, digital everything. Branding. And I've been designing a little bit, product. And then I've worked a lot on startups. And really what I'm doing right now is doing like a strange mix of everything. Um, and yeah, I've been working already for more than 20 years, I think.

I'm, I'm 44, so yeah, one of the two. Great, great,

**Amaury:** that's great. It's been quite a long time.

Yeah, And I was wondering, how do, I mean, what digital platforms do you use for your visual research, and either notes as well maybe, or organization? And how does all of them sit within your practice in a daily, daily life, let's say? 

**Daniel:** Yeah, so, the reason why I do it is because, like, I mean, when I was like 18, 20, the only way to, like, get that was, like, design books.

And I really, I spent an insane amount of money just buying design books. And I remember, like, spending days and days in the design library, just, like, going there. Going through books, buying, sharing with other, with other friends, exchanging books, and that was like, like, the place to like, , let's say, eat, design, and absorb design.

And of course, like, when the internet started, I was like, pretty naturally, like, beginning there. Like, it was pretty natural just to like, okay, use the internet too. But of course, like, the books were just, like, up there. Yeah. I mean, the transition was like pretty, pretty gradual, but I think it took more like 10 years.

But at some point I started to realize, oh my god, I haven't bought a book in like 2 years. That is really weird. And I mostly used just the internet for gathering stuff. But then the challenge comes when you start realizing that like, the booking itself, it's not a, it's not a packet. Of course, like, what it is, it's like, it's curated, it's put in an order, it is selected, it's around a topic.

When you just... I don't know, grow around, you take that for granted, you think that reality is like this. When you go to the internet, that curation doesn't exist. So what you end up doing is like, just by instinct, it's a bucket. Which I mean, it's just a bunch of shit in one place. And this is probably what I've been doing, like, I had still the same, , what's it called?

Net dump, and I have it in my desktop, and I just like put shit there. But then with time you start realizing, oh my god, then it's pretty difficult to come back to that. So what I started doing is just like, You discover one in studios, someone tells you, Oh, those guys are great, whatever, you go to the website, Really, I just like take the images that are like interesting, Put them with the name of the studio, And I started saving it that way.

But of course, like, that has problems, It's kind of hard, you cannot share it with other people, And then, Tumblr happened, Really, the reason why I was using Tumblr, It's gonna be pretty stupid, The reason why I was using Tumblr was like the shortcuts. Because I could go with J and K. I think K was to save it, and I could go like, very quick, yeah, because like, I cannot go with mouse, like I go too fast, and I go like, pa pa pa pa pa, oh yeah, I need that.

And I just like Tumblr because of the shortcuts, because I could go really, really quickly. And I just, like, it didn't do it because like, any intention, it just like, did it because I'm, I've been very, always like, very insecure in the sense of, , Not falling behind, but like culture or ideas moving into one direction.

And for me to miss that. So I was like, well, it's very conscious. Like I always have to spend time absorbing design. If not, culture is going to move into one direction. That's why I was like going Tumblr and just doing that. And then like from there, like they're doing Twitter. Well, Twitter and Arena. Why?

Well, because I realized that That's really weird. And then. And at some point, I probably, like, it comes with age. When I was younger, I was much more protective of my links, my discoveries, my, like, whatever. But then at some point, you start realizing, like, it doesn't really matter. I mean, you share it, it's even better.

You meet people, you help other people, who cares? And still, , it's not like they're going to, like, steal your findings because they are just there. What you need to, it's not information for the patients to look through them, and not many people have that. I started realizing, okay, let's put it on Twitter and whatever.

And just with the same intention as they're gonna like put it there, people like it, fantastic. And people started liking it. Same thing with Arena. However, I have to say, the Arena is not that fast as Tumblr. The way they use it that much, but what is cool is that the people that I have found there, they're like, I've met a couple of friends.

And they're a couple of people that are like super, super interesting. And 

**Amaury:** that's what's great about it. Did you get in touch with people on Arena directly? Or did you start to follow each other? 

**Daniel:** So there was one designer called, , Ben Pieratt, I think it was called. It's like an American guy. He did, , something that was kind of like arena, but like a million years ago.

And it wasn't one of the first of curated products for you to purchase. But it was like really well designed. And I was like a big fan of that guy. And then one day, years later, I found it in a page. And I was like, Oh my God, just as a fan. And then I kind of like, became like friends with this guy. And then at some point years later, I hired him to help me on a frantic project, like a couple of years ago, through the internet.

And the guy was like, Ah, sweet, you are like, yeah. And it was like, really weird. That's great. 

**Amaury:** Actually, that's great that meeting people through exchanging visual references can also... Yes. Spark, , collaborations or on working together. Yes. 

**Daniel:** So this is great. However, I, I have, I have noticed one thing by the, the, the, the sheer amount of shit that I collect.

You have to have a, a, an obsessive personality or like a mind that goes too quick into one direction, which is not good sometimes. Mm-hmm. . And what I found is that if you meet people that do the same thing and they have like a very wide range of taste or, or aesthetics that they. They're sensitive to you can either find people that like a little bit crazy or people that are like really interesting and really smart So I have met people that were like, oh my god All their people that were like, oh my god, this person is really smart really interesting Say any of their first group There's a woman called Elizabeth Elizabeth Goodspeed.

Okay. She's yeah, she's freaking fantastic Everything she puts in Arena is crazy good. And in Twitter, she also puts incredible. Like, if you contact her, she is 

**Amaury:** amazing. Can I write her name down? Sorry? 

**Daniel:** Elizabeth How? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Elizabeth Goodspeed. I'm gonna send you the Twitter link. 

**Amaury:** Ah, yeah. Can you send it on Twitter or...

Yeah, yeah. I'll 

**Daniel:** send it to you later. Because she is really, really good and she responds to everything. Ah, that's great. Thank you. Because also, by the way, like, something that I freaking hate about the internet is, like, most people just don't reply. Yeah. And, and, yeah, it's like, it, like, it's better, like, she replies, and the people that I've met, they do reply, which is good.

**Amaury:** Perfect. Thank you so much. Um, so, so yeah, and, um, so you, we, we talked about how this can spark collaborations, and I was wondering, did you use other tools? Before those internet tools, or before Arena, Tumblr, etc. , that you, no? 

**Daniel:** Anything else? Books, then Finder, just like drawing images. Yeah, yeah. , and then at some people creating tools, , local tools.

For? You being able to organize with tags But, something that I've realized is because I've been doing this for like 30 something years, is that like technology comes and goes. , and, and companies disappear. All companies disappear, no matter how big or how safe they seem to be. So what I, what I'm always like thinking of having is a technology that's so stupid simple that I can rip the content off.

And almost like me being an idiot, I could be, I could recreate it. So for example, Tumblr. Why do I like it? Because it's just one big stream of images, so it's so simple. And there are tools for downloading the whole of Tumblr. Um, the finder, of course, for like obvious reasons. But then other tools, like, I don't.

And indie tools, I don't like to use them. Maybe I like to use Arena. Ah, you know why I like to use Arena? Because you can take a hundred images and like drag them up on the screen. And it works. It's a simple, like, I think you need tools that are... Stupid, simple. Mm-hmm. in the sense that they're, they're incredibly reliable.

Yeah. Because they're gonna die at some point. Mm-hmm. . So that's what I don't like to use. 

**Amaury:** Yeah. Yeah. Okay. And, and is there, do you feel like there's any limit to the current tool that you use in your practice or, , 

**Daniel:** I would like to have arena with shortcuts. Mm-hmm. in the sense of like, in, in the way that Tumblr was like, just with a couple of screens, I can go like, really, really quickly.

**Amaury:** So this, I think, I think Arena is just releasing, they're, they're testing actually a new, , front end. Like they, they re, they recoded the back end, , for a better speed and etc. Um, so the speed is actually good and apparently what I've, what I've heard is that they're preparing, , shortcuts or other accessibility features.

So that, that could be interesting, yeah. 

**Daniel:** Yeah, and Arena also has that problem, like, when you load a wall that is too big, it loads all the images. I think Pinterest, what it does, like, it only loads the images that you're seeing, which is really smart, but technically difficult to do. And Arena gets, like, super slow at some point.

But yeah, I don't know.

**Amaury:** How can this influence your practice? Does it influence you economically, , creatively, 

**Daniel:** or? Economically, no. Like, zero percent. Because the only thing that I've done where I need other designers, like, get to know other designers, maybe. But, like, other designers don't make you money. Like, I don't know, that's something that I've always, like, told, like, young designers.

Like, if you want to get into design, like... Designers are not going to give you clients. Designers are not your enemy. They are competing for the same clients with them. Like, don't make friends with designers if you're trying to get clients. So, like, monetarily, no. But in terms of, like, , , inspiration, like, of course, 100%.

However, it's very tricky. Because images on the internet are, they don't have any context. They don't have a story. They don't have a client. They don't have nothing. They're just almost like a In an empty museum, would you find a lonely picture without a description of what it is? So, many images on the internet that are like, activating, they play with the idea of like, being enigmatic, being a little bit mysterious, from other worlds.

And that, you cannot translate that into brands, for example, or into client work. Like, that has something much bigger around it. That being said, , there's an insane... Um, and I the things that you find on the internet. Not only, like, people that people that have, like, maybe a moment of genius. Everyone has a moment of genius.

Now, it just goes there and it stays forever. And honestly, I, there are images, things that people, people have done that, for me, I consider them, like, like, I don't know, the Mona Lisa or some images that I just print them in my home and just put them in, like, this is, wow, a moment of genius. Perfect. 

**Amaury:** This is good.

and about, about, , the way you use those tools. Um, would you say you have any unconventional ways of using them? So you said about, for example, using, , shortcuts for Tumblr or also a notion, , you, you share resources. , 

**Daniel:** I've tried to do the notion thing, to share things with people and also to, so when I was working more in branding, because now I'm working in branding but I'm not doing fully branding, I'm doing a lot of like innovation and like, , detail and what not.

But when I was doing full branding, you always have the challenge of like having, , photographers, you need photographers to call, you need illustrators to call. And I think that we were, they were using Dropmarks, which was another tool. Dropmark? Yes, it was an old tool, I think, that died, or I just drop shit, drop links.

Get a screenshot or whatever, and it's there. And then from there, what I tried to do is, like, at the beginning of Notion, I'm gonna use Notion to handle the photographers and everything. But what I found is that the problem with all of this, it's like, you need a speed. You don't need features. Even all the tagging, all the stuff that Notion has, it's too slow.

So, the problem with the internet is that it's such a massive... You need tools that are stupid simple, but stupid fast at the same time. Notion is not fast, it's slow. And it has a problem. So when you try to search for photographers, or search for stuff, like, I still use it, but then I look at how many photographers I have a hundred.

It's like, that's just too few. It's like, Notion doesn't work. You need another tool that is like, has to be more stupid, and more, and faster. Much faster. 

**Amaury:** Speaking of, , maybe collaboration, um, Do you think, like, the collaborative aspect of those online tools to research and to exchange visuals, , references, is it a key point for you in your 

**Daniel:** practice?

It doesn't work. I even worked in a startup called Daisy. , it was, like, pretty interesting. it was founded by... Have you watched Game of Thrones? Yeah. What was the girl that at the end...

I can see her. Macy Williams. Yes. Ok, so she founded a startup, Macy Williams, with another friend of hers. And I worked at that startup, was about was precisely taking the idea of arena, picture, whatever, of a space, and collaboration with other people. And what we tried to do, and what I designed, I did design it.

It's like, okay, what if we take the idea of a space, in the sense of like a board, an arena, or pictures, or whatever. And then you can use that to collaborate with other designers. Put stuff, and other designers can join, and you can do stuff. And then maybe you can use it to even write a script, because you can put pieces of text.

And we build a whole product with that. But what I've realized is that it doesn't work. It really doesn't work. Like, if you're going to collaborate with other people, It's less about like the dumping of shit and more about communication. So what I've found is like, just spend more time on zoom, , exchanging images.

, you know something, that guy that I've met, Ben Pierratt, that guy that I've met, you know, something that he did, that was like really, really good. He did something called brand something. But what he did is like telling clients, pay me 4, 000 or whatever. And we're going to spend like three hours together in Sigma.

Working, and we're gonna record it, and we're gonna stream it in Twitch, live. And, it sounds insane, it is insane, , however, forcing people to get together and to talk about stuff that you throw around on the screen, that's the value. Going through Pinterest or Arena or something, no, that's too, it's inside, it's almost like, you get inspiration to do stuff.

Stuff or as soon as you put it, you need to talk. 

**Amaury:** So you, you don't have the context of the person who's posting the content into his own, , 

**Daniel:** how they feel. What is the thing. Even if you see, I dunno, the things that I post in Reno, in t or whatever, when you see everything, you start getting a sense of like, ah, this guy is into this.

Mm-hmm. You start getting a sense of what the aesthetics of the personality of the person like selecting or whatever, but you need to see like 300 images to be able to see that. Mm-hmm. . And you cannot do that when you're collaborating on a project as much as faster to say. This, this, this, blah, blah, blah.

Talk, talk, talk. Mm-hmm. , it doesn't work for collaboration. It's, it's a very, maybe that's why it's so powerful, because it's so personal, so intimate. Mm-hmm. , maybe that's why it creates the magic. You go to somewhere somewhat ler. It's like you're going, you know, scavenging through their like brain and their soul.

And that's what's beautiful about. And 

**Amaury:** still about the, the collaboration aspect. Um, how much, how many people would you say you can include. In part of your research, would you include, , just you, the team of people you're working with or your clients or also maybe people that you follow on Tumblr or any other platforms?

**Daniel:** When you say research, what do you mean? For a specific project with a goal or for 

**Amaury:** example, um, by repo reposting, , elements on Tumblr or doing visual research for projects. Um, 

**Daniel:** I, I, like to, , I, I don't do it with a goal. I just do it because I have a stupid impulse of collecting shit and organizing stuff in two pockets.

Like, I don't do it for a project, and even when I do it for a, you know, if I, if I'm doing a project, and I'm trying to get inspiration to build a mood board, and the mood board is maybe more for other people. I'm going to express that, hey, we should do it around this idea or whatever. What I do is like, go to the things that I have created before in Tumblr and Arena and I just go through them.

Like, oh this, this, this, this, this, and then I put it on Miro or whatever. But like, this thing that I do, I don't do it with a goal. I never research with, I don't have a research system, no. Like, I just look for the stuff and, And take what you can. I pick what is beautiful and what's interesting. And I try also to post things that are, or get things that are like purely visual, or to most extent that are like mostly visual.

Text, never, or things that have like a clever plan of words, like, no, forget, no, just image it. Mm hmm, mm hmm. 

**Amaury:** Okay. Okay. Um, so yeah, that is, that is, , kind of replies the question I had just right after. It kind of replies to the underlying structure you have by selecting or curating, , visuals. Is there anything else to this, , method, or?

**Daniel:** Um, I don't know, something that is interesting, it's like, I think, at least a that I've sent you the link, like, contact with, because she's like a fucking master about that. Okay. What I've seen is like, she kind of like, , I don't know, just starts getting a sense that that is a trend, or that is a thing that people do, and like, that's a thing, but it doesn't have a name, it's too small, nobody knows that it even exists.

But you know that it's there. Um, she puts a name on that. And maybe it's fun when you start like, scavenging for interesting things and you start realizing, oh that's a thing and you feel attracted to it, go there, but it doesn't have a name. You can't even search on the internet for that, it just doesn't fucking exist.

And that's what is interesting, when you start seeing when you think about like, culture or what people produce, and it's not it's random, but all of a sudden it creates kind of like rivers. But it's like, you have to see a bunch of images, like, going into the same direction, or creating the same language, but because it's so nascent, it's so, so young, it doesn't have a name, but it's just like, oh, Alessio's into that.

, and that's, that's, that's why, first of all, I, I, one thing that I have is like a, is like a, what do I have? Cyber, I don't know what it is, in Arena, I have like three channels, like three years. And that was like, now it's a thing, but three years ago it was not a thing. And I started getting into, oh, it's like cyberpunk.

But it's different, it's biological, and it's like, oh, but like, and I saw people doing the same thing,

**Amaury:** and I was like,

ah, oh, ah, but it doesn't have a name, that's bad. You let a lot of content public to everybody, , by reposting on Tabular Arena, but I was wondering, is there any visual research that you do, or that you compile, that you keep for yourself, also? Yes, 

**Daniel:** yes, yes, yes. So, for example, There are, okay, so So, if, if many times there's like a topic or an idea, I put it there and I start collecting 20 images, but like there are no more images that I find, that I find naturally, because that, it's almost like that river goes nowhere, it just like dissolves.

So then what I do with these things is keep them private, and if I see that after collecting, collecting, collecting, that it becomes a thing, then maybe I publish it and make it public. And of course like there are other things that are going to be too... , impolite, or weird, or not weird, impolite, rude, or some people who could be offended, of course.

I keep those private. Of course, yeah. And all, yes, and of course, like, when I post things to Twitter, something that I found is that people are really fucking sensitive. And I'm, like, terri I've learned to be terrified of people. In the sense of, you can post things, but you cannot say, like, anything that is not even, like, these things.

It's tiny negative. Some people get really mad. And so what I've learned is like, just post when you have something nice to say. And even when I don't have something nice to say, I try to make it sound nice. You sometimes read the text, you realize like, he's making a critique, but he's saying something that's like, yes.

It's like, yes, on purpose. And I have a lot of negative things to say, but what I've learned is like, knowing how people are, how insane they are, it's like on the internet. Don't say anything negative, or you're going to get in 

**Amaury:** trouble. 

**Daniel:** Yes, yes. And also because like, the design world is a tiny village, like everybody knows each other.

Like, just in Spain, in Madrid, like, all of a sudden you know everybody. And then I moved to London, and then like, really. It's like, you don't know everybody, but you know who it is. Like, you have, oh, you know that guy. Oh, that guy knows that guy that knows that guy. And all of a sudden, like, oh, London. they play a bit in Spain.

In Spain and London, they cross. And all of a sudden, I met someone that worked with someone in Madrid. So, it's like, don't say anything negative. 

**Amaury:** It's the same in Switzerland, really. Like, Switzerland is a country, but it's also a big city for designers. Like, the whole country in itself.

**Daniel:** I have to ask you, because my wife used to live in Zurich, and when I met her, she lived in Zurich, and then what we did, like, I tried to find design work in Zurich, but what I realized was, Zurich, because I love Zurich, and I think it's the best country in the world, 

**Amaury:** I love Cervellas,

and I think it's them. 

**Daniel:** So, but the thing is that what I've realized, and you have to tell me that this is true, like, of course, if you work in banking, there is work, but if you work in design, it's like, it seems that Switzerland is a country that produces great designers and the schools are fantastic, but there's no industry because the country is too small.

So what people, when people are good, they just end up leaving. Yeah, 

**Amaury:** I think the, the issue is it's pretty super saturated with excellent designers everywhere, like, , There is no big structure that do cultural, , commissions, for example. So I would say there's a pretty gap between very small entities and then big agency, and there's not in betweens.

And so, generally, it's a lot of very small structure with maybe two, three employees maximum, and... And it's also super hard, like, , to, to get access to, to good, , to good, um, commissions. It takes time to get to know, , and to build yourself a network in the city. So in Zurich, it's even more difficult than, , Lausanne, for example.

And, and, and surprisingly in Zurich, there's also more, more opportunities, you know. But for example, my, I've been in Lausanne for 10 years. I was in France before where I grew up. And, um, and yeah, it, it takes some time to, to have commissions, but even now, like, I don't really have a lot of commissions for Lausanne based clients.

It's mostly, , I even have clients in London, for example, so... Really? Yeah. 

**Daniel:** Yeah, and also, like, yeah, I, I have a friend here that is from, from France, but has been And we were talking, asking him about how is the, the thing in France, he was, like, railing against France. And, and it's true what he was saying, that it's like...

The country is very fucking conservative. And when you go like, Oh, yes. But in the, When you go into, see, But conservative aesthetically, And in terms of like, creativity, You go into an advertising agency, And they're all like, oh my god, They're like 15 years behind. And what I found about Zurich is like, At least Zurich, that's the one thing that I saw, Is that when you go into commercial, commercial design, It's like, it's fucking boring as hell.

They're like crazy, like conservative, but then you see the young designers, and they're like, oh my god, they're like from the future, it's an insane

**Amaury:** gap, like, it's like, it's true that the biggest agencies is not that interesting, unfortunately. It's not, , not 

**Daniel:** even the culture. It's like, it's not like you're gonna see a, an ad from Negroes that is gonna be interesting. No, it's fucking boring. Never, 

**Amaury:** never, never, never. Um, and yeah, especially like, , there's a, yeah, it's pretty hard to, to find the right balance between, okay, I want to have money, but then I also want to do nice projects in Switzerland.

You know, how, how does it work? Yeah. Especially when you start out after a bachelor's or master's degree. So, yeah. 

**Daniel:** It has to be Italian, so at the end it's like we moved to London, because like in London, it's the place that there's... 

**Amaury:** Many things to do, yeah, for sure. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So do I have any more questions?

Um, yes. I was wondering, speaking more precisely about Arena, do you use, , do you contribute yourself to the channels of other people? For example? 

**Daniel:** No. Because... Because I do it like, just for myself, to have like a record of like, how things change, the thing that I was thinking, and also like, I like it, but it's funny, but when you, when you have a very long career, you look at like, five years behind, and then you're like, oh my god, I'm so bad, or my style was like, so shitty, but then it's cool, like, you see the growth, you see the progress, and it makes you reflect, and it's like, because of course, what you start thinking is like, okay, is it what I'm doing shit?

Because if what I was doing five years ago was cool, is it what I'm doing right now to get this year that I'm not seeing? And I mean, that's, that's a good thing. But, if I start collaborating with someone, I've tried it a couple of times, and like, it never worked. And also because I'm too insane, in the sense of like, I post a lot.

And then like, people post just two things. It's like the rhythm. I would need to find someone that posts just as much as me. And there are not that many people. 

**Amaury:** And so then it's finding the right balance of curation, , maybe quantity or, yeah. Quantity. 

**Daniel:** Quantity I think is important because of course you post a hundred things and the other guy posts like ten.

It's like you're drowning the conversation. There's no conversation,

**Amaury:** it's that, , speaking more about Digital Guardians, I don't know if you had the time to dig a bit into it since we last spoke on Twitter. 

**Daniel:** Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I even reposted the article, dude. Like, It's fantastic. It's crazy. I love the, the, that that woman's blog, it was like super good. Mm-hmm. . And what she was saying, by the way, like about AI was the only two smart, the second smart article that I've read about ai.

Mm-hmm. , the first one being mine, of course. . And 

**Amaury:** yeah, because it, it's really about, , a balance between having a blog and having, um, something that's, , connected by notes like, , the, a structure of a dig digital garden and. 

**Daniel:** Yeah, I get her point. Like, , there's, , there's, , there has been that, that discussion since the beginning of the Internet of like, yeah, you can trace back, da, da, da, da, da.

However, I would say that the problem is not technical, it's cultural. Because, , there was a culture before of people posting for the sake of posting because they wanted to do something good with the world. I remember there's one guy... That I downloaded the whole site. One guy in Russia that was collecting, , cigarette packs.

And he had a collection of like thousands. Like fucking thousands on that shittiest website that you could imagine. And the guy just posted it there. And it's like, that spirit, that is what's missing these days. We have that insane technology. Nobody's posting dog shit on anything. And when they do, everything is too self conscious, too self promotional.

Nobody's... Very few people are just doing things for the sake of like, Oh, it's beautiful things. That's the problem. Technology, you can almost patch the internet today by making sure that you post links or whatever and you could kind of have software going back to the... It's like, I think the problem is cultural.

It's like, everyone is, everybody is already hustling. And that sucks. Fuck hustling. Like, whatever. I hate that. Yeah. Um... 

**Amaury:** Yeah, because, yeah, I think you're right on this as well. It's more like, um, yeah, relying on the people who gather the content. And it makes me think now that I found a Google sheet document that has a list of all those old blogs actually of people collecting things like this.

If I can find it again, I will send it to you. Maybe it can be of interest. 

**Daniel:** Oh yeah, please, please. Yeah. Yeah. 

**Amaury:** Um, and yeah, maybe I have a last question. Um, Would you say that using those tools helped you meet people, , in real life or to start working together? We, we kind of responded to that before, but...

**Daniel:** Yeah. Not that many, because I think it's, like, everybody that does that, it's, it's like, the, the beginning of museums. I had a work... You know, it's like in London, like in people in the 18th century, they were just collecting curiosities, like, through the empire. Cabinets 

**Amaury:** of curiosities. 

**Daniel:** Yeah, yeah, like literally, yeah, the cabinet of curiosities, like, just collecting shit that I like, that is curious, and like, and I put it all together in a very tiny space, just because, like, the impression that it creates is amazing.

I think the problem is, like, there are very few people that do that, and very few people that do that now. Because they have been told that that is wrong. That you have to have a topic. That you have to have an idea. That you have to have an organization. That you have to research. And nobody does it just for the sake of doing it.

And the few people that do it, they're very few and far between, and they're very rare people. And strange people. So you can meet them and whatever, but it's almost like, it's like artists doing their own thing. It's like, everybody does their own shit. But then you meet them, it's like, oh, I can enjoy whatever.

But collaborate, and... Very helpful. Okay. 

**Amaury:** Okay. Thank you. Um, so I think we, we reached the, all the questions I had in mind for the interview. Awesome. So thank you so much for this. Um, I will have to, to derush it and then to, to do a transcript for the text as well. So if you want, I can send you back, , also the audio, , and text if you're interested.

**Daniel:** Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Did you record video or just audio? 

**Amaury:** , I did, , I think we've, , it took the video as well, so I think I will only need the, the audio in any case, so. Ah, 

**Daniel:** perfect. Let me, I'm gonna, I'm gonna take one picture because I'm gonna put it in my diary because it's pretty cool. 

**Amaury:** Hey, thank you so much for this talk.

It was really great and insightful. And, and yeah, let's, , speak soon as soon as I have, , news, , of how the project goes. It should be finished by the end of November, so I will let you know. Perfect. 

**Daniel:** Contact this, this woman that I sent you. She's, she's, she's fantastic. I will, you're going to like what, what she has to say because she has, he has written a couple of like essays precisely about the problem of like curating and using that for creative work, which we haven't gotten too much into, but in professional work, everybody now, like it just goes straight into posting other people's work.

And I've seen young designers having a lot of problems with that. Because they are not very good by just taking what's useful, but they take the whole vibe. And that's wrong, very wrong. Because you cannot recreate the whole vibe of a piece when you're doing a brand project. But you can say, oh I like the circles, just pay attention to the circles, fuck everything else.

But they don't do that. Just get the vibe. And if you do that, you cannot use it in your own projects. And I've seen a that these days. But that's a problem. And she has written about that. Ok, I will 

**Amaury:** look into it and I will try to find you this Google Sheet document. Oh yeah. Yeah, that can be nice. Thank you so much.

Perfect. Have a good end of day. 

**Daniel:** By the way, did you send me your Arena link? I 

**Amaury:** didn't, but I can send you my socials, , in the Twitter so you can, , yeah, you can have a look at them. Cool. 

**Daniel:** Perfect. 

**Amaury:** Thank you. Thank you so much. Have a good day and see you soon. You too. Bye. 

**Daniel:** Bye bye. Thanks.

