## Jonas Pelzer

Jonas Pelzer is a designer and developer mainly based in Berlin, Germany.

This interview was done over emails in September 2023.

**Amaury Hamon** **Can you introduce yourself?**

**Jonas Pelzer** I’m Jonas, a designer & developer based in Berlin. Besides working on commissioned interaction design work and digital-focussed branding projects, I engage in self-initiated research and practice revolving around topics such as communication, literature, visual culture, the web, and typography. This has led to projects like the website builder [temper](https://temper.one/), the web design gallery [collected](https://collected.li/), or my independent type design practice, [Jonas Type](https://jonastype.com/). 

**AH** **what digital platforms do you use for your visual research, notes and organisation within your creative practice?**

**JP** In addition to my notes app and my analog notebook, I mainly use <span class="arena">Are.na</span> for research and organisation. I also use Twitter, Mastodon and Instagram, but I don’t consider them comparable. I sometimes look for specific resources on Twitter and Mastodon but that’s as far as the research part goes. I mostly use these platforms in other ways.

**AH** **Did you use others in the past? Some you have yet to try? Do you feel limited or is there any risks about them?**

**JP** I tried multiple research tools in the past, most of them don’t exist anymore. But I always came back to a non-collaborative standard setup with bookmarks and notes before using <span class="arena">Are.na</span>, which is the first platform I’m really happy with.

**AH** **Do you use them in unconventional ways? (For example with collected.li and the Arena API) Create custom tools, hack, etc.**

**JP** My web design gallery collected.li takes its content from an <span class="arena">Are.na</span> channel that I’m regularly updating. I was collecting inspiring website designs for myself for two years already when I started playing around with the API and built this site. What was originally intended as a fun little experiment has now turned into a quite popular design showcase.

**AH** **How do you articulate and structure knowledge nodes to each other for them to make sense together? Do you have a specific method to it? By typology, subject, etc.**

**JP** I don’t have a specific system or method, I usually just create a new channel for a certain research topic and start adding bookmarks and notes. Whenever I stumble across other people’s resources on the platform which seem fitting to my research, I add them to my channel too.

**AH** **Can you describe your day to day experience with such tools? When? Which circumstances? Only during work?**

**JP** I use the <span class="arena">Are.na</span> browser extension a lot. Whenever I happen to find an interesting article, image or any other resource relevant to one of my ongoing research channels, I connect it with only two clicks. This happens several times a day, usually during working hours, but not necessarily.

**AH** **Is the collaborative aspect in those online tools a key point for you?**

**JP** It’s wonderful to have such a big pool of knowledge you can easily access, but I think the collaborative part is not essential for me. I rarely use channels which are open for contribution as I usually want sole control over the curation.  

**AH** **Do you contribute yourself to others people knowledge structures?**

**JP** When I come across channels that are open for contributions and feel like I have something interesting to add, I do that. But I don't actively search for them.

**AH** **Did the use of such tools help you to meet people IRL/ start collaborations?**

**JP** It did not happen with <span class="arena">Are.na</span> yet, but several times with Twitter and Instagram.

**AH** **What do you let public, private, open to contribute by others? How do you feel about it people accessing your research?**

**JP** My more general research (like inspiring graphic design or useful development resources) is public from the start. Project-specific research often starts private and is sometimes published later. I rarely make channels open for contribution. I think it’s great to share my findings and thoughts with others, but especially for project-specific research I sometimes feel like I’d have to add some more context to certain nodes before publishing the channel, otherwise it might be confusing.

**AH** **Speaking of learning in public, are you familiar with digital garden websites? Do you use one or would you like to use one?**

**JP** As a big supporter of a more personal and less corporate web, I’m a fan of the digital gardening concept. I don’t have a site like that yet, but could imagine creating one in the future.
