Bio

This interview was done through videocall and recorded in September 22nd, 2023.

**Amaury:** Can you start by introducing yourself? What do you do? 

**Gemma:** Yeah, sure. So I'm Gemma Copeland. I am a designer and independent researcher. I am based in Lisbon, but previously I lived in The UK, the Netherlands and Australia, and have worked at design studios and all of those places. The main thing that I do day to day is I'm part of a worker cooperative called common knowledge, which is distributed in Europe and the UK, we are seven people at the moment. And it's a mix of kind of designers and developers and facilitators and organizers. And we work with, left wing political organizations to help them with their design and digital strategy, basically.

**Amaury:** What is the digital platforms do you use daily for your visual research, notes, or organization tool within your creative practice, whether it is common knowledge or just you. 

**Gemma:** in my personal practice or, as I'm working on common knowledge projects, it's mainly, arena for references and then obsidian obsidian for like note taking, which is also I guess like a digital garden.

Although I don't think I use it to its full extent. I'm not like a super, I don't have this amazing graph that's all connected. It's very like, And I mean, for Common Knowledge we use so many tools. We have, we have a notion and which we kind of used for everything for a while, but we've, over the last couple of years, more spread out from wanting this kind of Like big monolithic tool that does everything.

And we've actually started using lots of different kind of interconnected tools. Because I think we found that perhaps, you know, this kind of generalist approach of like trying to be this all in one thing is actually not the best because it doesn't do anything well. Whereas now, like we have a project management thing and a kind of finances, time management thing and a like.

Yeah, kind of collective, , writing like in all different kind of platforms and it actually works much 

**Amaury:** better. Yeah. And would you say that you're, you're limited by those tools? Like, like you said, like, , maybe one tool doing everything doesn't work so much. So maybe one use tools is better. 

**Gemma:** Yeah, it's, it is a kind of fine line.

I think that, tools that do One thing. Well, but are interoperable with other tools. I think that for me, at least at the moment, that's the kind of gold standards, you know, we use, for example, I mean, this is really nerdy, but like for, , project management, we use, , linear and it's just so, it's so beautifully done.

Like the product design is amazing. And like for us, we're working on software, you know, it's. It's interesting to us to like, you know, spend our day to day as we're working in in a space that's like really well designed and like we're kind of like we enjoy the patterns and everything that it has. So, yeah, I think it's important and and with stuff like that.

I don't feel kind of limited by it. I guess others. I do a bit. And one of the things that we were complaining about recently is just how, in general, these kind of platforms try to expand and like do more and more. And so you start getting overlaps between them. And then it's unclear about where you should do one thing or the other.

**Amaury:** Where did you draw the line between uses of? 

**Gemma:** Yeah, exactly. Cause it's like, Oh, if, you know, three different things have, you know, are a potential place where you can have a project wiki, like where do people look, et cetera. But yeah, in general, I think that we really like tools that are quite opinionated and have like certain like affordances.

Built in, particularly those that are like not about trying to get your attention all the time. So, for example, we don't use Slack, and we use this tool called, which is like designed by the people who do Todoist. I think the company is called Dewis. 

**Amaury:** Sorry, I think it's Dewis. I couldn't hear the name of the tool you said.

**Gemma:** It's in history. Twist is the name. 

**Amaury:** Okay, I don't know this one. 

**Gemma:** Yeah, well, we like it because it's kind of designed for asynchronous working that doesn't have notifications and like everything threads. And so, And we have, for example, like a kind of real time chat on Signal, but that deletes after 24 hours and the idea behind doing that and then using this thing that has Threads and like, notifications, et cetera, is it's about like, not, not trying to use things that are always like distracting you and also building that kind of collective knowledge base over time.

So, whereas like WhatsApp or Slack, everything gets lost into the stream. You're not actually building anything long term, you're just kind of chatting and it's chaotic, etc. Whereas if you do things where it's like, you're not trying to build this kind of monolithic knowledge base from scratch, but like, little and often you're kind of Okay, we're talking about this here and then this is the conclusion and blah, blah, blah.

And then you can kind of refer to that and everything's already organized. I think that makes sense. It's kind of quite abstract to describe it without you showing you. 

**Amaury:** Yeah, no, no, no. But I completely get it to go. out of the stream, like, I remember reading the article of Maggie Appleton about like the garden versus the stream or like web as topography versus web as a stream.

And, and yeah, it totally refers to that in a way too, but it's interesting to think of how to develop organization chats or things like this. As something building over time, instead of just the instant and AI instant instant thing. I don't know how to say, but, yeah, I completely, , find, get it.

So, and I wanted to ask you maybe before you use all those tools, would you say you used others before or is there any other platforms that you would like to use in the future, maybe that you haven't tried yet? 

**Gemma:** I mean, one of the things we've been talking about at the co op is like completely moving off. Notion and using obsidian as like our kind of note taking tool. But it doesn't seem to be so designed for collaborative working. Like it seems much more kind of individual. So I'm not sure it would even work.

But yeah, I'm trying to think. 

**Amaury:** Would you consider building a custom one maybe? Like a custom website 

**Gemma:** or? , no, I don't have time for that. It's one of those things where you're just like, I don't know. I think it could be distracting from our core mission. To get too much into that stuff. I mean, we have in the past, obviously been interested in kind of building our own software, particularly around kind of Political organizing, but it's, you know, software is so, time consuming, resource consuming, slow, risky, et cetera.

And I really think that, like, the only, like, you should be very, like, people should be very careful before kind of embarking on, like, we're going to build a new thing because I feel like so many things already exist and it's just a way to kind of, like, suck a bunch of time and energy, et cetera. And that's it is.

Things that are already out there or build upon open source things and that kind of thing. And it only builds something custom if it's really like, Oh no, nothing like this exists. So like we absolutely have to do that. Although it's easy to convince yourself that that's the case, I guess. 

**Amaury:** Yes. And about, , for example, , arena or other tools that you use on more, maybe on a personal, , level, would you say that you use them in unconventional way?

Like, do you hack a bit through normal uses or do you have specific use case of it, , for website, , that you use the API to display it on the website? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Would you say it's international or what's the goal or? 

**Gemma:** Yeah, I mean, I think that, I think there's a whole arena channel of people using arena for websites.

Yeah. And so like, people are doing it. But maybe it's not the most conventional. I do feel a bit sneaky sometimes because I also use it to like, post all the images on my site and therefore not pay for my own hosting. Thank you. I'm just like using your service. But yeah, I think. Yeah, maybe it's slightly like using it for my website is maybe like slightly different to how most people use it for kind of collecting images.

But I think that the collecting thing, I think. I use it very similar to everyone else. I don't have, I've seen, you know, people with such like organized channels and like, specific ways of naming things, etc, etc. And I'm definitely like, not that organized. It's much more just like, oh, it's a really convenient way to like save things quickly.

**Amaury:** Yeah, yeah, yeah. And would you say you have a a specific way about how you organize the references you gather or, or is there, is there an underlying logic behind all of it, or it's really more like spontaneous and 

**Gemma:** much more spontaneous. I would say, I think that like, for me, that stage of the process is still really intuitive and it kind of has.

That's like, that's where it has to be intuitive. I can't articulate why. It's like, if I have a brief or something, you know, you're taking in all this information like talking to the people you're working with, like, and then I feel like. Then I just need to kind of take a step back and like internalize it for a bit and like process it almost in like a dreamlike way, like not thinking about it directly and then looking for, references that kind of express something, but it's like, it's not so conscious.

And I think that's the interesting thing about being able to kind of walk through the other people's arena channels and stuff. And you can kind of like, okay, does this image. Like, you know, is it, is it, I don't know, sparking joy or something like it feels like the project and then you can like collect it and then take a step back and look at all together.

So, yeah, I think for me it's like it's very spontaneous and I put things in like big buckets and it's not, it's not. Very like structured or like thought through. Yeah, 

**Amaury:** but I find it super interesting in a way that you like I've interviewed other people also for the master thesis that are have very different uses of.

Arena, for example, and, and, and the way you, you display it publicly on your website and that most of your channels also are open to edit and things like this. I mean, I can see that you have a, a high focus on making it accessible publicly and also collaboratively. And, and for me, that's a huge. Point also on how we use online tools, like how can we make them collaborative enough or, and, and how this can influence maybe a.

Another way of doing design or aside the research. And, and, and, yeah. Maybe I have other questions about this, those collaborative aspects or public aspects. Yes. Would you, would you say it helped you, , to use for example, , , arena, , to meet, , people or other designers or to start collaborating as well?

Yeah, 

**Gemma:** definitely. I've actually met a bunch , I've met a bunch of people on Arena. Yeah. And, like. The place where I worked in London, when I emailed, , a place called Future Corp, which is now based in Paris. Ah, yeah. I know. But, yeah. When I emailed Mark, when I had moved to London and was looking for a job, he, like, recognized my name from Arena.

And that's kind of how I, I got the job. And then, ... Yeah, also, like, we went to New York and actually met met the people from arena and that kind of thing. So like, for me, it's been very like, I've met a load of people through it. And, you know, like, in a weird way, because I guess there's obviously not really messaging on it.

It's, it's one of those things that you kind of See people and find them interesting and then kind of find them on other channels and start talking to them, etc. But yeah, definitely like I got, I can't remember when I started using it, but I remember it was when I was working at Lust. So between like 20.

I don't think it was as early as 2012, but like between 2013 and 2015, sometime around then I started using it, which is like 10 years. 

**Amaury:** It was in the beginning of the tool now of arena. Yeah. It's like, was it 10 years ago? A bit more maybe? I don't, I'm 

**Gemma:** not sure. Yeah. I think it was something like that.

Like 12, I think it had been going for a little while before I found it. And then, so yeah, I feel like it has just generated a lot, a lot of kind of things. 

**Amaury:** And aside from meeting people or doing collaborations, is the, for you, the collaborative, , aspect of, for example, this tool, is it a key point for you in using it or?

**Gemma:** Yeah. Yeah, it's nice what you said about the, having the channels open, because I had forgotten about that, but that was like a decision I made a few years ago of just yeah, this idea of like not trying to kind of gatekeep or like say these things are my own because at the end of the day, it's like a collection of other people's things.

So why should I be like, Oh, this is mine as the curator. And also just like wanting to kind of open things up for, seeing what other people would put there. And then it's like, I mean, it doesn't happen that often. There's, you know, Arena is such a, like, polite platform, I, I guess, where people respect each other's little gardens that they're working on.

Yeah. And so it doesn't happen that often, but like every now and again, people will like add something to an open, channel, and then It will be like surprising and new to me, you know, and like, then I learn something or see something and it feels like you're, you've had this like weird kind of very quiet interaction with another person, which is super nice.

**Amaury:** It's super interesting what you said about the idea of gatekeeping references, because as you said, in a way, the references we find on Arena, if it's not from actual local folders on our desktops or whatever, but they generally are references from other people that we connect in our owns. I had the same, change of mind as well.

When I first started using arena, I kind of wanted everything to keep, to be kept private and just for my own thoughts. And it was not ready to show, but then suddenly I said, but those, those blocks are actually references of other people. Why should I. Keep them private and it should be open. So I put everything public again.

And, and, and, and now the, in the end, it kind of creates like chains of people referencing each other. And I was wondering in this, , network of references being linked together by different persons. I was wondering on your side, how do you consider, , the, the amount of people being part of your research?

Is it. , is it just you that you would credit your, how you source things or is it direct collaborators in group projects or would it be also external users like people that you connect things from or it's kind of similar like to bibliography at the end of a book where people just list where it comes from or kind of make sure 

**Gemma:** about that.

Yeah, it's an interesting one. I think like for, you know, for projects that are working on a common knowledge, we would be kind of crediting the people in the team and collaborators, maybe less so like, you know, on the project page, listing references. But I think for like in both like the common knowledge blog and even more so on my own blog is very much about kind of like speaking to the people that like speaking about the people who have influenced me and kind of linking to it and explaining it.

And it's a bit more about the kind of process. So I hope that it is. Yeah, it's clear. I definitely try to like, hide things. And I guess one of one of the kind of, continuous lines of thinking that I've been like interested in over the years is, is trying to like, move away from this idea of designers as like individual genius.

And instead, like, recognizing, like, that you're kind of a sum of all these different, like, influences, etc. And so, yeah, I try to be quite public about who those influences are for me, and to kind of trace it. Like in my blog over time, basically, like I, there's like a handful of people also that I'm like constantly quoting.

One of the things that I want to work on, with my website, cause it's due a bit of like an upgrade. Is making, because I have tags at the moment, but, apart from being able to kind of click on tags at the bottom, you can't see like an overview. Okay. So I really want to make a page where you can see kind of like by tag, like an overview of stuff and like to be able to basically make it more into a digital garden where you can kind of see the different collections.

**Amaury:** Actually, if you, if you're interested about that, well, it's more like side, side of the interview, but I started using something called Quartz, which is basically you can link Obsidian to publish it as a website. Oh, cool. There is this kind of idea of, , I can send you the link of it if you're interested.

Wait. Yeah. Can I do the same here in the chat? Yeah. Okay. It's like, yeah, it's like, , a theme or something that you can use to, to publish, , , like the directional lean. So there's a graph view with the circles tags and how you can connect them together. It's super, super interesting. I just started trying to customize something out of it, but, , it could be of interest to you, I think.

Yeah, that's what you're trying to, to, to, to get. So, and about, about the, the more collaborative aspects. I was, wondering like, , no, sorry, not the collaborative aspect, but more like, You mentioned that you have a blog where you kind of, , also source and bring maybe a further context to the references that you have instead of just being blocks on arena, which can sometimes be.

Dearticulated or for other people, it's, it can be hard to also connect the dots between how different things from different backgrounds are gathered in a, in a channel, for example. And, and yeah, , I was wondering like, about, how to, I don't know how to say this. The, , sorry, I have a freeze of how to say, I will go to another question and see if I can, if it can be easier.

**Gemma:** Yeah. Can I, can I respond to like what you were saying and maybe the question, is making the blog, like when my, me and my friend Piper worked on my website, part of that, you know, before I just had like a really plain page and then arena, part of wanting to build a blog was, I felt like. my practice was too much just collecting and collecting and like consuming and it felt in a way kind of passive and and not ever working through in greater detail like what I actually thought about things like almost going too far onto this kind of like intuitive collect collecting and not enough kind of synthesis and like articulating my own point of view.

So blog was meant to be this kind of step of like, not always consuming, but also producing and like, not necessarily producing, like, I was saying that like, I'm producing original ideas because like, nothing is original. Everything's a remix, but like, at least able to kind of draw, draw out those threads and You know, spend a bit more time on them and like go go further with the curation and then just like collecting a bucket of things basically.

So it's almost like, yeah, I don't know, like, yeah, just weaving it together into something more articulate, basically. 

**Amaury:** It's interesting as well that you You feel not, like I've interviewed people who has maybe more an artistic practice and are very like trying to preserve the amount of reference that they can show publicly in then making their own artwork, for example.

They want that the artwork be kept, , the only thing public. and that the influences are not straight obvious and public to to everyone else unless there is a an act of mediation in within an exhibition or something like this and I was wondering how how did it make you comfortable with sharing this publicly maybe um is it close to an idea of maybe open source or having knowledge access 

**Gemma:** or yeah I mean that's definitely it it's it's like a mix of You know, I think it just all boils down to my inherent hatred of like individualism and ownership, like, you know, with Common Knowledge, with the co op, like all these kind of things that I'm interested in.

It's about shared ownership and like creating a commons and You know, recognizing that we're kind of, we're not individuals, we're part of a network where we contain like communities, etc. So I guess it's just like my, my just general approach to the world. And. I don't know.

I think I, I just always like from fairly early on working in design studios, just became kind of allergic to this idea of like there being these kind of like star designers who were struck by genius and everything. Like after working in places where you see what goes on, you know, and it's like, Oh yeah, these are these people who are famous.

But then there's like a whole studio of people working for not very much money and like working really hard. And not really getting credit except for the, you know, reflected, you know, glamour of, of working for these places. So, it's meant, I guess it's meant to be like, , the antithesis of that, basically.

I 

**Amaury:** totally get this. I think when, especially when you, when you start and when you finish art school, basically as well, you, you read very often, you have this realization moment where some like, you maybe don't want that actually to work for somebody acting like this. 

**Gemma:** Yeah, exactly. And I think that it's just, you know, if, if the whole culture of design is about You know, some people get to be famous and, like, well respected and, and a bunch of other people.

Don't get recognized and don't get paid well, et cetera. Like it, I dunno, it just creates this whole climate of yeah, competition and that we're all trying to fight. Against each other for scarce resources, whereas I think this kind of approach of like the commons and open source and collectivity means that you create this kind of shared abundance, where you can all get something and be happy and like enjoy your work, etc. And you're not trying to fight each other. 

**Amaury:** Yeah, yeah. Completely agree on this. Let me check if I have other questions since we starting to be short on time, fortunately. Is there, is there a part of the, maybe the influences you gather on arena or other platforms that you keep private or everything is open?

Everything is public. , do you keep a part of it, , working under the radar 

**Gemma:** or? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I have secret, secret I can't talk about. I, sometimes it's like when, , the idea is like not fully formed and I'm still thinking about something, it will still be private. Mm-hmm. , or yeah, or if it's just like to do with kind of personal life stuff.

Sometimes, like if. I'm working on something and I want to keep the channel private, then it's also an interesting kind of prompt for me to understand why is like, is it like that I'm taking too much reference from these things and perhaps it would be better to make it open and make sure that you're not like secretly being derivative.

Yeah. So yeah, I feel like it kind of, the, the public private thing is interesting because it's also about like honesty or, or, or like keeping yourself, you know, making sure that you're not like ripping people off or like getting too influenced by things basically. 

**Amaury:** I have a feeling that keeping everything private can be.

Like igniting competition of ideas and references in a way. So, 

**Gemma:** yeah, yeah, yeah. Again, it's, it becomes this thing of like, Oh, these are my like deep cut, like private references. And like, that's my secret sauce for how I like do cool design. Yeah, for sure. There's, there's definitely that kind of. I 

**Amaury:** think. And, do you contribute yourself to other people?

Open access, , channels, for example. 

**Gemma:** Yeah, yeah, definitely. I always like. You know, if I have this idea for like, Oh yeah, this would be a cool channel or like, I want to collect this thing. Usually I'll do a search first. Does it exist already? And if it does, and it's open, then I'll just add to that. Or like if I see my friend has a channel, et cetera, I'll add to that.

I've also enjoyed the process from the other side for 

**Amaury:** sure. Perfect. Actually, you're one of the very first to say a positive answer to this, like, , Sometimes, , most of the people just never use this part and, and it's nice to see like different backgrounds and different use cases and how people use those collective tools.

Yeah, a final question to conclude, which is more like an open one, but, , how would you say that your practice is, , politically or economically affected by the way you use those collaborative online tools? Is like the public collab research model online can influence the way you design, or is it rather vice versa, like the reverse?

**Gemma:** I'm trying to think. I mean, it influences my design just in that like, I guess the contents of the research influences my design. I guess also like the affordances of the tool like Arena has kind of shaped my brain in certain ways. I think maybe like from a political standpoint, like what I find interesting about these things.

So for example, I made a, , arena group for evening class when I was part of that and also UVW like designers and cultural workers. And then there are a bunch of channels in both that are like, you know, very explicitly political, kind of like, how can designers unionize or like, resources on, on this or like how to start a work, a cooperative, et cetera.

Mm-hmm. And so I think that the, influence of a tool like that is just like knowing that there is an engaged audience. Of like exactly the kind of people that you're trying to reach like artists, designers, cultural workers, and that you can get like very public and also open for people to kind of contribute.

And so I think that does kind of influence. I guess it influences my practice but hopefully it also like influences other people in that like they maybe come across. You know, like when I was involved in UVW, a lot of the time you talk to designers who have never thought about the fact that work is political or that like, you know, working conditions is something that you can like fight for, etc.

Like there's design can be so apolitical. And so. I feel like using a platform like arena to then collect political references, can hopefully have like an interesting impact as well. 

**Amaury:** Yeah. Okay. Well, thank you very much for, , for your time and for answering all those questions. It was really, , insightful and And yeah, do you have any final words, maybe, or, 

**Gemma:** No, I mean, thanks for inviting me.

It was like, it was nice to talk about. Usually I'm just talking about the co op, so I was quite happy to talk about, you know, arena and your questions are really good. So thank 

**Amaury:** you. Thank you very much. But the, yeah, the questions were mainly focused on. How people use, , tools in a certain way and how can it influence, , their practice.

So, so yeah, it's, for you, it was super interesting to, to get a chance to interview you because, you have a practice that is, , super actively into collaborative aspects and, and also publicly sharing knowledge on platforms like arena. So. It was a very good, , opportunity to, to have more insights about, , how, how you use, this basically.

So thank you. Thanks a lot for all of this and, and yeah, thanks. I think it will be, I have to deliver it by the end of November. So hopefully before that I can send you a transcript and, and audio for your own archives as well for you also to check if. If I publish it on the website, maybe you want to cut things.

I don't know. I mean, so yeah, I will in any case send you a, send you the content once it's ready and, and yeah, we'll send you the link of the website once it's online, 

**Gemma:** exciting, cool. All right. 

**Amaury:** Thank you so much. Have a good day.

